Ethan Mirani, Junior
Cedar Lane 

The Cedar Lane Anti-Bullying Committee and their faculty advisor work throughout the year to address and combat bullying behaviors within the school in the hope of maintaining a culture that finds these behaviors unacceptable. With adult assistance, the committee members organize all activities for the annual Anti-Bullying Week. Each day has a different theme, accompanied by educational and entertaining activities. Many of the events bring staff and students together to encourage them to learn more about one another and to understand others’ perspectives.

School Psychologist Jennifer Min says, “This year, there were a number of students who helped in small ways; however, one student – Ethan Mirani – was the driving force. Ethan was a member of the committee for two years and felt very strongly that the week be organized by the students and highlight the importance of treating all students with respect, regardless of race, religion and gender identity. Ethan was the one who prompted the faculty advisor to schedule planning meetings and took the initiative to invite and encourage others to join the group. He attended every meeting and was the primary planner for the week’s activities, soliciting feedback from other students to ensure that what was planned would be relevant and interesting. He showed strong leadership skills – staying after school to prepare for activities and making sure that the daily activities went smoothly. Without his leadership and enthusiasm, the week would not have happened.”

Ethan explains his involvement by saying, “I have seen others being bullied, and it happened to me when I was younger.  I want to keep it from happening at Cedar Lane.”

Jasmine Howard, Senior
Centreville High School

Jasmine “Jazzy” Howard was in search of something to do for others less fortunate. While attending the Key Club district convention in Baltimore last year, she discovered Yuda bands, finely crafted leather wristbands made in Guatemala. Each features a piece of coconut shell decorated with a unique symbol or animal shape inlaid into the leather. Colored strings are then attached to the band. Jazzy feels that selecting a particular design and colored strings makes the bands more customized and personal to the buyer. 

The plan presented at the convention was to have students sell Yuda bands for $7 each. Part of that money would be returned to the artisans in Guatemala, with the remainder donated to a disadvantaged foreign youth which Jazzy could select from a list of candidates. Jazzy was attracted by this double benefit: support poor people in Guatemala and also assist a deserving youth. Jazzy and her team chose Jabu Moyo, a 15 year-old man from Zimbabwe. Jabu said he is passionate about pursuing an education and becoming a teacher in his native land, and Jazzy is similarly passionate about education, believing that it breaks the cycle of poverty and is a chief ingredient to peace. 

Jazzy gathered a team of helpers from her school’s Key Club. They created advertising posters and speaker announcements, and then set up shop in the school cafeteria for ten days during lunch. The group sold 240 wristbands. When combined with other donations, over $1700 was contributed to the project. Jazzy notes, “I was pleased that so many students wanted to contribute. Several students even gave us $20 dollar bills, and told us to keep the rest for the charity!”

Shaan Chudasama, Senior
Chantilly High School

Shaan Chudasama is the co-founder and vice president of Young at Art, a non-profit organization that helps the elderly, disadvantaged children, and veterans improve their opportunities and quality of life through various art-related activities. 

Shaan’s organization raised almost $10,000 through a variety of fundraising, company sponsorships and personal donations. He and his sister created the organization in 2013, tapping his passion for sports and her passion for art. They have worked with organizations like the Special Olympics and Sunrise Assisted Living to offer activities involving both art and movement. The organization develops and teaches art classes, delivers performances and lectures, educates participants and the community about the arts and their benefits, and conducts other activities to improve confidence, self-esteem and motor skills. 

Young at Art worked with the Young Athletes Program, sponsored by Special Olympics, to teach fifteen handicapped children aged 2-7 art projects and other activities designed to improve their motor skills. The program has increasing levels of difficulty so participants can see their own progress. Shaan also coordinates the Young at Art leadership team, consisting of students from other Fairfax County schools, to expand the reach of Young at Art and increase the number of programs they offer. Shaan’s efforts with Young at Art last year earned him a Gold President's Volunteer Service Award (an initiative of the Corporation for National and Community Service). 

Shaan says, "Delivering art and sports related programs for both the elderly and disadvantaged children has not only allowed me to help those who are in need, but it has also enabled me to inspire peace and selflessness throughout the community."

Additional information about Young at Art is at yaava.org.

Vanessa Mae Avendano, Senior
Falls Church High School

As the Vice President of her school’s Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual & Transgender (LGBT) Club, Vanessa has led training sessions for faculty to better learn how to approach LGBT students and the issues facing them. In an effort to fight hate, Vanessa also created FCHS United, a coalition of clubs at her school which share similar missions of spreading peace and acceptance. She created a script and collaborated with these clubs to produce a series of videos concerning anti-bullying and respect. 

Part of a large, extended Filipino-American family, Vanessa describes herself as a person of color, an immigrant, and a member of both an ethnic and a sexual minority group. While Vanessa acknowledges the political necessity of speaking out for tolerance and acceptance, she feels that building personal relationships between people is central to her work. She says, “I think it’s incredibly important that people understand how they affect others by the way they interact, and how they make others feel as individuals in this society. Spreading tolerance is a constant work in progress. It has to do with every word you speak and every action you take. We have to always be conscious of the effect we have when we use our voices, and make an effort to do things that benefit and bring others up rather than tear them down.”

Emily Lewis, Latin Teacher and Co-Sponsor of the LGBT Club, summarizes, “Vanessa’s ambition to spread awareness about social issues that relate to acceptance of gender, religion, and race is contagious and empowering for anyone who is around her.”

Vanessa hopes to pursue a degree in psychology and to have a career in social work with an emphasis in housing and assisting LGBT youth. 

Sabah Munshi, Senior
Hayfield Secondary School

Sabah Munshi’s contributions to peace are rooted in empathy and kindness on global and personal dimensions.

Globally, Sabah has helped to alleviate the world’s water crisis. She says, “Water scarcity never occurred to me as an issue until I saw a video of a girl who walked miles and then came back home with impure water.” Sabah helped organize a Walking for Water project at her school, raising awareness of this need and over $2,000 for the UNICEF Tap Project.

Nearer to home, on her first day as a candy striper at her local hospital, Sabah helped a man who had lost his senses from dementia. He was struggling to open a box of juice and to swallow pieces of bread. She noted that “Even a small conversation and helpful gesture brought a smile on his face.” More recently Sabah has been volunteering at Virginia Hospital Center on the renal unit. “As an aspiring doctor, giving back to the community has become a part of who I am.”

By wearing the hijab, Sabah identifies herself as a Muslim. She says, “Wearing a hijab is not just a part of my religion, but a way to diminish the stereotyping of Muslims by spreading love and positivity. Showing kindness is not just about being nice; it’s about recognizing that every human being deserves care and respect.” She quotes Henry James as saying, “Three things in human life are important: the first is to be kind, the second is to be kind and the third is to be kind.”

Surabhi Khanal, Senior
Herndon High School

Surabhi Khanal draws her commitment to the role of servant-leader from Anne Ryan, Reston Lions Club president and Herndon Leo Club advisor, and from her uncle, Dr. Naresh Neupane, currently a post-doctoral researcher at Georgetown University, who has encouraged her to think big in her aspirations for education and for service. Surabhi has been an active member of the Herndon Leo Club since the 10th grade, and served as president during 2015-2016. Surabhi, a naturalized citizen, was born in Nepal and moved to the US when she was a baby. 

Surabhi is the founder of MedLove, Inc., which she established with the IRS as a tax-exempt, non-profit organization. The mission of MedLove (a combination of ‘medicine’ and ‘love’) is to help rescue women, both domestically and internationally, who are victims of human trafficking. The MedLove website is http://www.medloveinc.org/.

In 2010 Surabhi travelled to Nepal and saw children living on the streets. Through that experience, she became acquainted with the work of "CNN Hero 2010" Anuradha Koirala, whose non-governmental-organization, Maiti Nepal, provides housing, hospital care, and schools for children in Kathmandu, Nepal. 

As one of the first MedLove projects, Surabhi worked with Herndon Key Club members and students from other high schools in December 2016 to create the Night in Kathmandu Gala. The benefit dinner helped raise awareness of local human trafficking and raised $3,000 to combat HIV and AIDS in Nepal. 

Surabhi is described by School Counselor Kenneth Kim as having a "heart for others". She plans to pursue science and medicine with a goal of rescuing victims of human trafficking. In particular, she aspires to research HIV and AIDS and tackle the virus here and around the world. 

Naba Khan and Shafia Talat, Juniors 
King Abdullah Academy 

Naba Khan and Shafia Talat are the first generation in their families to grow up in the United States. They greatly value the benefits they enjoy here, but they are eager to help others less fortunate. They say this is what led them to found “Women of the World” (WOW). Shafia describes WOW as an organization “promoting women’s rights and helping women going through difficulties such as homelessness, hunger, oppression, or abuse.”

The girls have worked with family members in Nalgonda, India to open a sewing institute. Acceptance to the program is based on economic and personal need. The goal is to provide financial independence to women through employment in the textile industry or in their own business. 

Their family members living in India provide the implementation and oversight, and WOW supplies the funding for the teacher, the rent, the utilities, and all the sewing supplies used in the class. A local woman was hired to teach the class of 15-20 students.  

One or two times each month, Naba and Shafia involve the whole student body in fund raisers.  So far this school year, their events have included Candy Grams, an ice cream sale, a Women’s International Day Assembly, and a henna art stand.

WOW contributes to the formation of a more peaceful world by helping remove the barriers that exist between the privileged and the underprivileged. As Naba explains it, “By breaking gender barriers and empowering women to do the best they can, we are promoting the ideas of peace and acceptance among communities regardless of gender.”  

Jamie Hunstad, Senior
Lake Braddock Secondary School

Jamie Hunstad worked to establish a Special Olympics program at her school. She notes that “School sports are an important part of high school, and athletic opportunities should not be limited.” 

Motivated and determined to establish a Special Olympics basketball team, she approached her school administration and contacted the Special Olympics coordinators. Multiple-disabilities teacher, Caitlin Smith, notes that “Jamie has been a pivotal student volunteer in the venture to get the club off the ground.” Lake Braddock’s Special Olympics basketball has been so successful that a track and field team was started as well.

Now serving as assistant coach of both teams, Jamie considers herself lucky to have formed a personal relationship with all of the players and to watch them blossom. In her words, “The Special Olympics brings something invaluable to the students who participate, from the pride of receiving a standing ovation at the spring assembly to the sight of their peers cheering them on. The Special Olympics helps integrate these students into the school community.” She hopes her fellow students will attend the games and cheer for their Special Olympics team.

Jamie also was instrumental in bringing Rachel’s Challenge to Lake Braddock during her sophomore year. Rachel’s Challenge develops programs aimed at minimizing bullying and promoting tolerance and inclusion through on-site presentations. Jamie lobbied for bringing a Rachel’s Challenge speaker to Lake Braddock to address the student body. The presenter challenged the student body to come together in awareness and support of one another. Jamie describes how deeply moved the students were by the message, and that its effect on peer attitudes has endured. 

Donya Momenian and Chrissie Ivanova, Seniors
Langley High School

Donya Momenian and Chrissie Ivanova co-founded a chapter of Girl Up Club at Langley High School during their sophomore year and currently serve as co-presidents. Hannah Wolff, a college and career center specialist, credits Donya and Chrissie for their commitment, and energy in working locally through this United Nations Foundation adolescent girl campaign. 

Motivated to work in support of women’s rights, Donya and Chrissie decided that Girl Up was the most appropriate organization. They received permission from the school administrators to approach the UN Foundation in New York City for guidance in establishing and chairing a Girl Up Club. Over 1,000 of these clubs are registered in 43 US states and 51 countries, each dedicated to empowering girls through education, fundraising, advocacy, and service. Current development programs for educating girls are in six countries: Guatemala, India, Liberia, Malawi, Uganda and Ethiopia. 

The Girl Up Club at Langley has grown from two to nearly 30 members – including a few boys. Meetings are held twice a month after school and information is disseminated through Twitter and Facebook. They raise awareness and recruit new members by participating in activity fairs at Langley and Cooper Middle School. Chrissie and Donya have raised money though bake sales and the club prepared feminine hygiene packages for ‘Days for Girls’ to be distributed to adolescent girls in developing countries. 

Hannah Wolff notes that “When girls are empowered, it benefits all of us. Investing in girls is key to reducing poverty: girls who receive an education marry later, have fewer children, and are more likely to get healthcare for themselves and their children.” 

Naomi Soquar, Senior
Robert E. Lee High School

Naomi Soquar is one of the founding members of the Amnesty International (AI) club at her school, serving last year as secretary and currently as president. In these capacities, she worked with other students to enroll volunteers and to write letters in response to global human rights violations. Naomi says that this project was especially satisfying when she discovered that their letters contributed to the release of two political prisoners in the Democratic Republic of Congo.

As the president of the club, Naomi leads other students in learning about human rights issues such as systemic racism and refugee/migrant rights. This has encouraged the students to think critically about why these problems exist and what can be done to relieve them. Naomi and other members of the AI club also worked for a local clothing drive for homeless people. 

In addition to her work with the AI club, Naomi has been active in various service organizations such as Girl’s Learn International, the Capital Area Food Bank, and Habitat for Humanity. Stephen Johnsen, the faculty sponsor of the AI club at Lee High School, says, “Naomi was the first person I thought of when I saw the posting for the Peace Award. I can’t imagine a student who is more deserving of winning this award.”

Naomi volunteered at an orphanage in Thailand last summer. There she got to know the children, taught English, and did various manual tasks such as cleaning the shower area. She says, “I believe in giving back to the community and intervening when human rights have been violated. I feel my various service and leadership experiences have taught me how to do that.”
community and intervening when human rights have been violated. I feel my various service and leadership experiences have taught me how to do that.”

Sean Doyle, Senior
James Madison High School

Sean Doyle grew up learning from his grandmother and great-uncles about social justice and civil rights. This background, combined with his own interests, inspired him to join the Madison Amnesty International Club (AI). 

When Sean attended an AI Regional Conference in Philadelphia, he met people of all ages who face human rights issues. He now spends his free time meeting with other activists to coordinate efforts to address issues ranging from abolishing the death penalty to reducing gun violence and police brutality. This year, AI’s main focus is on the refugee crises worldwide, and Sean is working to convince the Vienna Town Council to name Vienna an “I Welcome” refugees town.

Sean received an AI internship as a Student Activist Coordinator. In this position he acts as a large-scale organizer and leader for ten local Amnesty school groups, plans major regional and statewide events, and spearheads the latest campaigns. Sean believes, “Students like to be involved, but they don’t know how. It is my job to show them the way.”

Sean is in a mixed English for Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL) homeroom class which is evenly divided between native English and native Spanish speakers. The intention is to help ESOL students feel less isolated and more a part of the school community. Sean uses the Spanish he is learning for general communication and for tutoring the Spanish-speaking ESOL students. 

“Sean is a thoughtful, non-judgmental young adult, open to considering all perspectives before weighing in with his own opinion,” says Daniel Blanchet, his history teacher. Sean’s passion has led him to the goal of becoming a lawyer specializing in social justice and human rights. 

Aidan Kemp, Senior
George C. Marshall High School

Aidan Kemp was interviewed and chosen by the faculty to be a lead senior mentor for their Freshman Transition Program, with the goal of easing the pressure of a competitive high school. Aidan met with freshman students in a weekly class setting to answer their questions about the general social atmosphere and their particular concerns as freshmen. Aidan said, “Our goal in answering these questions was to be non-judgmental and truthful and to encourage openness about issues that may cause stress or friction. In doing so, we hope to preserve the positive atmosphere at Marshall High School.” He also worked with faculty to develop lesson plans and to organize activities to help students relieve stress, cope with bullying, and encourage school spirit and unity.

Throughout his high school years, Aidan has also been actively engaged in community service with the St. Thomas Episcopal Church in McLean. He traveled with about a dozen members of his church to the inner city of Oakland, California where he worked at a food bank and helped clean out and refurbish a community space at St. James, which also serves as a multicultural center. Aidan summarized, “The trip was a great experience and I learned a lot about others and myself.” 

Aidan has also participated in local service missions that included working at food banks and building and repairing houses in impoverished communities of rural southwest Virginia. 

Josh Leong and Sam Gollob, Juniors
Mclean High School

Josh Leong and Sam Gollob learned about Herman Wainggai, a human rights advocate from West Papua, a Pacific island bordering Papua New Guinea. West Papua has been controlled by the Indonesian military for forty years, resulting in brutal treatment of the native people. Herman Wainggai received harsh treatment as a political prisoner before escaping in a small boat to Australia. He is currently a Nobel Peace Prize nominee and a visiting scholar at George Mason University, advocating for UN intervention to address the suffering of the people in West Papua. 

Deeply touched by the story of Herman Wainggai’s struggles, Josh and Sam decided to make a film targeted especially for teens. Noting that news spreads rapidly to this audience through social media, they considered the most effective way to share his story to resonate with others their age. They decided to create a 10-minute documentary film, Herman Wainggai: A Hidden Genocide, (https://youtu.be/ZwbMgzei1k4) in which he describes his experiences.

Herman Wainggai: A Hidden Genocide premiered in April 2016 at the Garifuna Indigenous Film Festival in Los Angeles. Sam and Herman Wainggai were in the audience along many influential policymakers, filmmakers, indigenous people, and representatives from human rights organizations and humanitarian campaigns. Although their primary goal was to support Herman Wainggai’s campaign for West Papuan independence, Josh and Sam also hoped to motivate other teens to look outside their affluent community and to encourage them to help people who suffer in other parts of the world.

Sam and Josh plan to continue their activism in future careers: Sam as a journalist and Josh as a filmmaker.

Yosaph Boku, Senior
Mount Vernon High School

Yosaph Boku believes that the key to peace is understanding and that there is nothing more powerful in achieving it than expressing and sharing love. Yosaph learned from his friend with special needs, whom he helps every morning to get ready for school, that people respond better to expressions of love and being valued then they do to impatience and authority. Saying “You must get ready” generated hostility whereas starting with “Friend, I need a hug today” inspired cooperation. To Yosaph, this demonstrates the essence of creating peace between people.
 
Born in Ethiopia and living with his siblings away from his parents, Yosaph understands well the issues of immigrants. One of his role models is a fellow countryman who helps young immigrant boys settle in this country by providing shelter, food, clothing, and the guiding hand of a mentor. 

After being part of an ESL program in his community, Yosaph designed and implemented a program with a fellow student to teach computer skills to disadvantaged youth and adults in his community.  Selected for the gifted and talented young scholars program, he has spoken extensively on the importance of these programs.  He has also addressed groups of counselors, offering suggestions on ways to encourage more minority students to avail themselves of opportunities for advanced classes. Some of these talks are shown on YouTube https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bw4TFJKNZH8 .

Yosaph was selected to participate in the Virginia Governor School and Boys State, where he was elected Governor.  He hopes become a doctor and work with Doctors without Borders program.   He summarizes, “The real fountain of youth is service, because you live on through the person’s life you save.”

Roza Al Barznji, Senior
Mountain View High School

As a member of the Middle Eastern Kurdish community currently living in the US and sprinkled around Iraq and Iran, Roza dedicates herself to bringing understanding of her often misunderstood heritage. Roza has used her skills as a photographer to present her classmates with images depicting the Kurdish culture, religion, and government. 

Now 21, Roza came to the US three years ago as a refugee from Northern Iraq. Her knowledge of English was little more than the ability to recite the alphabet. As Roza’s skills in English progressed, she published seven stories which describe her personal journey as a Kurdish American, the plight of the Syrian people, the refugees in our communities, the value of mentoring in a school community, and the lost voices of the third party voters in the 2016 US election. She also created a documentary on American Thanksgiving traditions after she interviewed three generations of a family. Her writings can be viewed at http://mtviewmirror.com/ author/roza-al-barznji/. 

Using the international reach of her school’s online newspaper, the Mountain View Mirror, Roza’s peacemaking has grown with technology. She makes internet connections with Kurdish artists and musicians and fellow students in Kurdistan to create a cultural bridge of awareness between the Kurds and the Mountain View community. 

As summarized by her social studies teacher, Mike Hardy, “As her teacher I am excited about the learning we are doing together and the message that Roza brings to all of us to create peace through cultural awareness and understanding.” 

Blossoming Beauties
Quander Road School

Blossoming Beauties was founded for the two-fold purpose of helping girls grow into well-rounded, confident young women and working together on school and community projects. During their weekly meetings, the teens engage in team-building activities and ice breakers that encourage them to recognize their commonalities rather than their differences. They seek to develop an atmosphere of acceptance and have worked together on a variety of causes in both the school and in the wider community.
   
Once the group has decided on a project, the girls raise money through such events as Quanderpalooza, a school-wide yard sale, and a spaghetti lunch for teachers with food made and served by the Blossoming Beauties. Last year the group chose to work with Bethany House, a shelter for female victims of domestic abuse. They filled donated purses with personal hygiene items and treats for the women. Another project was making fleece blankets for New Hope Housing, a group dedicated to stopping the cycle of homelessness. In both cases, the girls delivered their gifts and got to see where they would be used and enjoyed. The group also planted a tree on the school grounds to honor the memory of a beloved teacher.
 
The Blossoming Beauties are currently working in collaboration with “A Space of Her Own” (SOHO), an organization committed to helping fifth grade girls avoid delinquency. Along with SOHO’s mentors, the Blossoming Beauties lead team-building activities, serve food to the group, and assist with making items for bedroom renovations for the girls. Blossoming Beauties expresses the importance of working together peacefully and being part of something larger than oneself to reach a common goal. 
 
Narjes Bencheikh, Senior
South County High School

Believing that “Rejecting intolerance and choosing to understand one another is the first step to achieving peace,” Narjes Bencheikh worked with her classmates to found two school clubs, the Muslim Student Association (MSA) and the International Club. As president of the MSA, her goal is to ensure that Muslim students have a safe environment to discuss issues they encounter in the community. She leads the approximately 50 members in role-playing exercises, such as how one of their friends could best respond to harassment from her classmates because of her hijab.

Narjes has seen a sharp increase in Islamophobia, which she fears will continue to escalate. She inspired students to create and display posters with positive messages such as “Salam. It is a greeting of peace, not a threat.” and “Just like its meaning, Islam preaches peace.” She also arranged for the MSA to hold joint meetings with South County’s Young Life chapter, where students of various faiths came together to discuss and strengthen interfaith solidarity at the school.  

The International Club was founded to foster dialogues among students of diverse backgrounds. Narjes serves as president and leads monthly discussions where approximately 30 students are given a supportive environment to express their opinions about current world issues. Recently she facilitated a discussion about the Ethiopia-Eritrea conflict. Students from both countries worked to put aside their difference and instead to focus on their similarities.  

The International Club organized the first annual South County International Night which was held last May. About 300 people came to watch fifteen cultures present their heritage through native dress, music, dances, and poetry.

Narjes hopes to become a doctor and work in refugee camps.

Emily Lockwood, Senior
South Lakes High School

Emily Lockwood has a passion for peace-building. Career Center Specialist Andrea Acosta says, “Emily is a driven, gracious, responsible, and compassionate young woman who believes kindness makes the world a smaller and gentler place. The fact that she speaks three languages fluently (English, Spanish, French) has given her a global interest and awareness that is rarely found in people her age.” 

Emily took a school assignment and turned it into an opportunity to really delve into options for improving the relationship between the state and society in Myanmar (Burma).  Reaching beyond the school library and internet, Emily sought information from primary and secondary sources at the Institute of Peace in Washington DC. There she had the opportunity to seek help from the program officer, with whom she has continued to maintain contact. She says that working with the program officer was “an amazing experience” which furthered her desire to work in the field of international relations. 

Emily is also interested in building bridges closer to home. She was chosen as a mentor to help freshmen transition to high school by helping them manage their school work and navigate social situations. She also serves as the track coach for young children with special needs and assists as a camp counselor.

Emily plans to attend the University of Virginia to study International Relations and Foreign Languages. As Andrea Acosta notes, “South Lakes High School is fortunate to have Emily as an agent for peace. She will be missed next year as she leaves us to make the world, or her part of it, a better place.”

Maiss Mohamed and Deema Alharthi, Juniors
JEB Stuart High School

When Maiss Mohamed began high school, the Model United Nations Club had ceased to function. Believing that students should learn about settling international conflicts through peace and diplomacy rather than going to war, she decided to reactivate the club. She recruited John Hiltz to be the faculty sponsor. Deema Alharthi was elected vice president of the club.

Maiss and Deema worked tirelessly to ensure that the club was successful. Fortunately, they were able to accomplish this and now 15-20 students attend the semi-monthly meetings. Maiss serves as Secretary-General of her school’s UN Club and Deema is Under-Secretary-General. In December 2016, ten students attended the Model UN conference at Edison High School and a record-breaking 19 attended the conference at Garfield High School the following month. At Garfield’s conference, Maiss and Deema won a verbal commendation for suggesting solutions to the Syrian refugee crisis to the other members of the Social, Humanitarian, and Cultural Committee.

Both girls are also interested in the welfare of those closer to home, and so they became active in Students in Training for Advocacy and Responsibility (STAR). In January 2017 the members of STAR visited the Virginia House of Delegates and met with their representatives to advocate for the rights of undocumented residents to have drivers’ licenses and to receive in-state tuition in Virginia colleges. 

Maiss and Deema participate in several service-oriented clubs such as the Key Club, Girl Up, and Interact. They have volunteered for several groups including The Virginia Coalition for Latino Organization, which works for the rights of Latin Americans.

Maiss summarizes, “Peace is not simply about resolving conflicts, but rather, it is unifying a group of people and creating a chain reaction of positivity.”

TJ Minds Matter
Thomas Jefferson High School for Science and Technology

TJ Minds Matter is a student-run organization focused on creating a community centered on support and collaboration, teaching respect for differences, and accepting strengths and weaknesses among peers. As stated on their website, “Together, we can lift each other up.” 

In a competitive school environment, TJ Minds Matter offers videos with testimonials from fellow students, teachers and even the principal who give practical tips on how to handle stress and disappointment. They also emphasize the importance of surrounding oneself with people who care. Along with a series of videos, the group provides resources about how to talk to someone in crisis and non-crisis situations. 

Students in the organization make themselves available to any TJ student who needs a friendly ear. While the members clearly state that they are not professionals, they are trained to listen non-judgmentally, believing that listening is critical to helping an individual feel understood. As one officer states, “I am here to be a friend and I'll listen to you vent about anything you need to talk about. … I don't think I'm very good at giving advice, but I am friendly and I won't belittle your problems.” 

In January 2017, TJ Minds Matter hosted their annual Mental Wellness Week, in which special themes were planned for each day. When high school students share a day based on Random Acts of Kindness, Pajama Day, and Stomp out Stigma (associated with mental illness), members of the school community grow together in respect and understanding. School Social Worker Danielle Armstrong observes that TJ Minds Matter creates a more comfortable environment to talk about mental illnesses as the organization “promotes peace and builds bridges as they connect struggling students to resources and keep the dialogue regarding mental wellness open.” 
 
Combating Intolerance
West Potomac High School

West Potomac is one of the most diverse schools in the US, with students representing 70 countries and 40 languages. The “Combating Intolerance” class was established in 2015 to create a sense of peace, inclusivity, and welcome. Teacher Robert Kerr designed the curriculum around topics in social justice, including combating racism and sexism, welcoming immigrant and refugee students, and advocating for the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and asexual students, staff and community members.

The class sponsored a school-wide “Diversity Week,” with days dedicated to women, sexual minorities, Latinx students, Muslims (both religious and cultural), and supporting the African-American community. Each month the 22-member class sells T-shirts and other items to help fund small, local non-profits which they select. Students are being taught to implement change in order to create a more inclusive society.  

Students in Combating Intolerance also learn to use their voice both literally and figuratively. They have written letters and emails to elected officials about legislation related to social justice and combating intolerance. Students make videos for various social media platforms and engage groups within the school in constructive discussions. Class times include research, lectures, videos, readings, and discussions about civil rights and social justice issues, both locally and nationally. Students then present their findings in social media, being careful to present articulate and reasoned conclusions. 

Robert Kerr summarizes, “The combating intolerance class has through its activities and visibility made West Potomac a more welcoming and safer place for all students, staff, and families.”

Rodney Wrice, Senior, and Audrey Wever, Junior
West Springfield High School

It all started when Rodney Wrice saw a YouTube video called ‘Throw Shine’ by 3 Musketeers. The video showed a shy boy befriending a new girl in school by giving her a candy bar. When Rodney showed the video to his friend, Audrey Wever, they decided, “Let’s do something like that at West Springfield.”

It was shortly before the presidential election, and feelings were running high at the school. As Audrey said, “Everyone was coming to school with his or her parents’ opinions, and no one was really listening to anyone.”

Rodney and Audrey bought several boxes of candy bars and put sticky notes on them with encouraging messages and asked people to take a picture and post it on an anonymous Twitter account @WSHS_ThrowShine they had set up. They began to sneak around the school, secretly leaving candy bars wherever they could. They came in early and stayed late, leaving candy bars on desks, stuck in backpacks, and tucked into corners for people to find. After a while the Mars Corporation heard of their campaign and sent them cases of 3 Musketeer candy bars so they could continue to give them to students.

Audrey and Rodney agree that it was fun to do this in secret, and to put some positive energy into their schoolmates’ days.  Rodney quotes William E. Gladstone as saying, “We look forward to the time when the Power of Love will replace the Love of Power.  Then our world will know the blessings of peace.”

Career Center Specialist Tisa Frederick summarizes, “By the efforts of these two students our school now has a new attitude of how we treat one another, and instead of throwing hate, we throw shine.”



 






 
 
 









